Welcome to section 5.1: Concept of a
Function. Let's start with the basics.
Think of a function as a machine. You feed in an input x. a rule
is applied. and an output comes out. Here. the rule is 2x plus 5.
If we put in x equals 2. we get 2 times 2 plus 5. which equals 9.
If we put in x equals negative 3. we get
2 times negative 3 plus 5. which equals negative 1.
In proper notation. we write f of x
equals 2x plus 5. Let's break this down.
f is the name of the function. x is the input variable. And 2x
plus 5 is the rule that tells us what to do with x.
To find f of 2. we replace every x with 2. So we get
2 times 2 plus 5. which is 4 plus 5. which equals 9.
Now for a reverse problem. If f of x equals 3x
minus 2. find x when f of x equals 13.
We set 3x minus 2 equal to 13. Add 2 to both sides to
get 3x equals 15. Divide by 3 and we find x equals 5.
A rational function has a fraction with x in the denominator. Here.
g of x equals 2x plus 3 over x minus 4.
Substituting x equals 2: the numerator is 7. the denominator
is negative 2. so g of 2 equals negative 3.5.
But be careful! The denominator cannot equal zero. So x minus 4 cannot
be zero. meaning x cannot be 4. This is a domain restriction.
IB exam tip: always show your substitution step. You earn method
marks even if the final answer is wrong. Never skip steps!